>>And it's, indeed, for
me a pleasure to be here
with you at this conference,
particularly since,
as those of you who are
familiar with my work know,
what I'll be talking about
is partnership spirituality,
reimaging and
reconfiguring reality,
which have been themes in my
work for over three decades.
And a lot of what you are
here doing, in many ways,
relates to what I call
partnership spirituality,
the search for
spirituality that is
both imminent and transcendent,
a spirituality that isn't just
off in some otherworldly
realm, but that
can inform our
lives here on Earth
with love and with
purpose and with meeting,
and yes, a spirituality
that we don't have
to seek by going through
this priestly hierarchy,
but that we can access directly
through what we call gnosis,
through our own ability to
access what is really part
of our human capacity,
the capacity to access
what we call the spiritual.
And as for this idea of
reimaging and reexamining
reality and
reconfiguring reality,
by reexamining both
spirituality and science,
that's something that
you are here doing also.
And, of course, I
don't have to tell you,
because you know from
your own observations
that what we call
reality, that that's
different in different
places and different times.
For example, not so
very long ago-- well,
not so very long ago in
terms of the long span
of cultural evolution that
I've been looking at-- reality,
for most people,
was that the Earth
is flat with God and the
angels above in the heavens.
And that was just
believed, even though long
before then, Greek
scientists had already
suggested that the Earth
is actually spherical.
But one of the reasons
that that, quote, "reality"
wasn't challenged is because
it was very dangerous
in those days to
challenge anything
that the official
powers, very much also
the religious hierarchies, said
to be so, because if you did,
you risked being burned
alive at the stake.
So that was one reason that
that reality maintained itself
in people's consciousness.
So what we're going to
really be talking about here
is that neither
spirituality, nor what
we call reality, the way that
it is socially constructed,
that is something that doesn't
just arise in a vacuum.
It's not an absolute.
It is something
that is related--
isn't it-- to the kind of
society, the kind of culture
that we live in.
So it reflects it,
but at the same time--
and this is very,
very important--
our beliefs, and as we begin
to reexamine our beliefs,
our myths, our stories about
what is and is not reality,
we can also alter,
quote, "reality,"
the social institutions
from the family
and education to
politics and economics,
out of which many of
these beliefs arise,
because it requires
different kinds of beliefs
to maintain different
kinds of social systems.
So what I'm going
to suggest to you
is that the search
that so many of you
here are passionately
engaged in,
the search for a
new spirituality,
that this is part of a larger
change in consciousness,
a consciousness that
many of the old ways
that we have been
taught to look at,
quote, "reality," to look
at ourselves and our world,
that these are not adaptive,
and that we urgently
need to reimage and
reconfigure reality.
And very specifically, I'm going
to suggest to you that what
we're seeing in our world
today underneath all
of the complex currents
and cross-currents,
seemingly random things that
are happening around us,
is really the tension
between two very different,
underlying possibilities,
alternatives
for structuring relations,
whether it's relations
with ourselves, with
others, or with our Mother
Earth, relations that over
the course of now about three
decades of multi-disciplinary
research, as those of you
familiar with my
work know, I have
identified as the partnership
model and the dominator model.
And you will also see that
the way that spirituality
is configured and imaged is
very different, depending
on the degree to which a
particular time or society
orients to one or the
other of these models.
And I'm also going to suggest
to you something that many of us
really know inside of us that
we may not call it the dominator
model, but that this
whole conquest of nature,
the conquest of other people,
of the whole ranking of one
race over another or of one
people over another, that
at our level of
technological development,
when we have technologies not
only of communication that
span the globe in a
matter of minutes,
but also technologies
of destruction that
span the globe in a minute, that
this dominator model is just
not adaptive and that part of
this new emerging consciousness
is the consciousness that
we really need to shift more
towards the partnership model.
And, of course, we've
already done some shifting.
You couldn't be at a
conference like this.
The things that we're
talking about here,
I mean, you'd all get burned
for heresy, wouldn't you?
Not so very long ago, just
a few hundred years ago when
society still
oriented more to what
I've called the dominator model.
So what we're going to be
doing in the short time
that we have together
today, well, it's a lot.
We're going to,
first of all, explore
some of the very ancient
roots of what we today
think of as a, quote,
"new spirituality."
And we're going to do this by
taking a journey through myth
and reality over 30,000 years.
And we're even going
to take a little side
trip to very briefly explore the
biology, the biology of love,
part of our biological evolution
that is still in so much
of the science of today ignored.
And then we're
going to come back
to present time and look at
the implications of all of this
for us today and
what kind of actions
can we really take to really
accelerate this shift,
not only towards a new
more partnership-oriented
spirituality, but towards the
kinds of social structures
and culture that
will support what
we're searching for-- a more
partnership-oriented society.
So we've got a great
deal to cover here,
and we're going to
have to go at something
like the speed of light.
But before I even
start, I thought
that I would just
tell you a little bit
about my own
journey, because this
was the journey that
eventually led me
to the new method
of inquiry that
made it possible to discover
the partnership and dominator
models as to underlying
human possibilities.
I was born in Vienna
during a time that,
in terms of the conceptual
framework that I've introduced
of the tension between the
partnership and dominator
models being something that
you see all through history,
was a time of very, very
tremendous dominator
regression.
It was the time of
the rise of the Nazis
to power, and my
parents and I just
barely escaped with
our lives from Austria
when I was a little girl.
And actually we really escaped
by just a hair's breath,
because we were on
one of the last ships
before one that was turned back
from Cuba, where we eventually
went, a shift that some of
you may have heard about,
because there was a
movie made about it
called "The Voyage of the
Damned," the St. Louis.
And it was a ship of 1,000
Jewish refugees-- women,
children, men-- who had
to return to Nazi Europe.
Most of them died in
Nazi concentration camps.
So we were on one of the last
ships shortly before that one,
and that really--
well, very early, I
started to have to ask myself
some fundamental questions,
questions that I think most of
us here have asked at one time
or another in our lives--
does it have to be this way?
Does there have to be all this
cruelty, all this violence,
when we humans have such an
incredible capacity for caring,
for creativity?
What is it that has chronically
pushed us back towards cruelty,
towards uncaring?
Does it have to be that
way, as we are often told?
Or are there alternatives?
Now over the research
of three decades,
what has been coming out ever
more clearly in ever more
detail is that, indeed,
there are alternatives,
but that we cannot see
these alternatives,
unless we widen our lands
of scientific inquiry.
And to radically condense,
because we are here also
talking about methods of
discovery, of the new method
of inquiry that I
developed, the study
of what I call
relational dynamics,
it looks at a much
larger database,
at the whole of our
history, including
our prehistory, at the
whole of our lives,
not just what so
many studies focus
on-- the political,
economic sphere--
but where we all live,
our intimate, private,
parent-child,
woman-man relations.
And also yes, at the
whole of humanity,
both its female and male halves.
And I don't have to tell you
that this is an approach that
is very different from
most studies that are quite
aptly called the study of man.
And, of course, we're
then told, don't worry.
Man, it includes woman.
Actually, woman includes man.
I mean, the word.
But aside from that, if you
really look at the books,
if they've got about
20, 30 pages out
of a 300-page book on the
female half of humanity,
oh, it's already a
progressive book.
Well, we all know that if we
look at only part of a picture,
we can't see the connections
between the different parts
of the picture, can we?
We can't connect the dots.
We can't see the patterns.
And so using this
method of inquiry
was like the pieces of a
puzzle coming together.
And I began to see these
connections, these patterns
that transcend all of these
conventional differences
that we're so used
to-- east versus
west or capitalist versus
communist or industrial
versus post-industrial
or secular or religious.
And the findings from this study
differ in very fundamental ways
from many other findings
about our cultural evolution.
And for me, the study of
our cultural evolution
is not just the
study of our past.
It's really the issue,
for me, is what can we
learn that that's
important for our present
and for the possibilities
for our future?
Unlike most stories, but like
some of the newer approaches
that we're beginning to
emerge today-- for example,
like chaos theory--
my work shows
that societies are
living systems,
and they're self-organizing
and self-maintaining.
But they are capable
during periods
of great disequilibrium,
such as ours--
we are living in a period
of great disequilibrium--
and also, such as
the period that we'll
look at in a few minutes
in our pre-history
of transformative change.
And another thing
that it shows is
that unlike the model that we've
been taught about evolution
as this straight line upward
progression from, quote,
"barbarism" to civilization,
which, of course,
if you look at the Nazis, for
example, or the Khomeini's Iran
or at the Taliban, you have
to say, well, wait a minute.
Where'd they get that idea?
But, of course, that
it's not linear.
And we know that
from our own lives.
Change, especially
transformative change,
is not linear.
There are periods of regression,
and really what I saw
is that, as I said,
all of history
has been punctuated by this
tension between these two
possibilities as to underlying,
if you will, attractors,
if you use the language
of non-linear dynamics.
And another thing
that I saw and that's
going to take us straight
into this journey
that I promised you that we'd
take through myth and reality
is that much that is
happening in our time,
including the search
for a new spirituality,
is not new, it's
not radical, but it
has very ancient roots in
traditions that we are now
against much opposition,
because remember, living systems
and systems of belief are
part of living systems.
They seek to
maintain themselves.
But we're beginning to
reclaim this information.
Well, of course, we're all
familiar with the stories
about, well, quote,
"reality," that
make it seem as if the
dominator model, this ranking,
whether it's man over woman, man
over man, nation over nation,
or man over nature, this
conquest of nature that,
at our level of technology,
is unsustainable.
But that's just how it is.
Right?
That's just human nature.
We have stories, for
example, original sin, right?
We're bad.
We're evil, so we have to be
strictly controlled, right?
You can see how these stories
have some relationship
to social structures, can't you?
Because it's very
convenient to have stories
that say that humans are
innately evil and that
therefore, the people on
top have to control us.
Then there are theories--
not just religious stories--
but scientific stories,
theories such as selfish genes.
And I sometimes
wonder why they argue
with each other, because
basically, it's the same story,
isn't it?
Something is wrong
with us, and they
tell oh, male dominance,
the controlled domination
of one half of humanity
by the other, violence.
That's just how it is.
It's in your genes.
Really, you didn't know, but
according to this theory,
you have no choice.
You are being run by these
selfish little genes who
are trying to
perpetuate themselves.
Well, same story, isn't it?
Something wrong with us.
Got to be controlled,
and why bother even
trying to change anything
if that's reality, right?
No point.
You might as well just say,
OK, that's the way it is.
And I'll just have
to live with it.
But there are many,
many other stories,
including, for example, the
story that we think nothing
actually of showing
to children, the story
in that caveman cartoon
that I think most of us
know all to well.
There's this hominid creature,
and in one hand, what has
he got?
He's got a club-- a way
to dominate, to destroy,
to hurt somebody.
And with the other hand, he's
pulling a woman by the hair.
Well, again, same story--
violence, male dominance.
That's the way things
have always been,
and then by implication,
always have to be.
And yes, we're all also
familiar with religious dogmas
about angry and punitive
deities, whether they're
Eastern or Western, who
capriciously inflict pain,
hideous pain on us for
the slightest disobedience
of the men who represent
them here on Earth.
So small wonder
then, since this is
part of our heritage from
earlier times that oriented
more to the dominator
model that so many of us
are today searching
for a new spirituality.
But then we're told,
well, this is radical.
This is new and, yes, sinful--
that this so-called new age
movement is the
work of the devil,
and that it's your job if you're
a God-fearing Christian or Jew
or Hindu or Muslim to suppress
this radical new heresy.
And, of course, it's not a
question of religion, is it?
It's a question of maintaining
an old system, a dominator
system.
So what do we really
see if we actually
embark on this journey going
back about 30,000 years?
What kind of
spirituality do we see?
What kind of imaging and
configuring of reality
do we see?
Well, the first thing that we
see if we go to the Stone Age,
to the paleolithic, there
isn't a single image, not one
image that even
remotely suggests
the kind of relationship that
all these other stories suggest
between women and men,
between men and men.
On the contrary,
instead of images
that we're so used to
glorifying, idealizing
the power to take life,
to dominate, to destroy,
we see image after image
that is part of the sacred--
because the art,
it was sacred art.
All art was sacred in those
times-- celebrating the power
to give and nurture life.
And yes, celebrating
very specifically
the power to give and nurture
life inherent in a woman's
body, as in those very
mislabeled so-called Venus
figurines.
I mean, take, for example, the
so-called Venus of Laussel,
which is totally ignored in
most discussions of paleolithic
or Stone Age art.
Here, at the entrance
of a cave sanctuary--
and we know these
were sanctuaries--
is an engraving of
a female figure.
She is nude.
In one hand, she
holds a crescent moon
with 13 markings--
the lunar calendar.
With the other hand,
she is pointing down
to a clearly etched vulva.
Now this probably indicates
an understanding not only
of the link between
women's menstrual cycles
and the lunar cycles, because,
of course, they're linked,
but also an understanding of
the link between woman's power
to give life and
the power of nature
to give and sustain
and nurture life.
So what we see then is
a focus on the rebirth--
it's a cyclical view of
reality-- the rebirth of nature
every year.
And it's very interesting,
because you know those animals
that you see on the caves?
And we've been told,
oh, that's prey.
Those are the
animals they hunted.
Well, archaeologists
now are telling us,
which most of the
animals on those caves
were not animals
these people hunted.
Moreover, most of
them come in pairs.
Yeah.
And very often, those
pairs are female and male.
So as the French archaeologist,
Andre Leroi-Gourhan,
pointed out, again, this
points out an understanding
of the relationship
between sex and rebirth
as part of a nature-based
spirituality,
as do the many
phalluses and vulvas
that 19th century
scholars simply labeled,
"unidentified symbols."
[LAUGHTER]
All right.
So you begin to see already very
early in our cultural history
evidence of a belief system that
saw the earth as our mother.
And I told you we were going
to go at the speed of light,
so we're going to
jump about 10,000--
well, about 20,000 years,
from about 30 to 20,000 years
ago to 10,000 years
ago-- to the Neolithic,
to the first agrarian societies.
And, again, if we really look
at the art of the early part
of the Neolithic-- because
there's a shift later,
and I'll get to
that-- if you look
at the art of the early
part of the Neolithic,
you see something
very interesting.
You see an absence of
the kinds of images
that we're so used to
seeing of men killing
each other in heroic battles, of
men killing other people, women
and children, of so-called
hallowed conquerors
dragging back people in chains,
of rape, the kind of stuff
that all the big museums,
even the old masters, right?
How many scenes do we have
of Zeus raping everybody?
I mean not just women, but
cows and swans, and, of course,
the message is rape
is a godly sport.
But again, if you don't
see this kind of imagery,
you sort of have
to ask yourself,
could it possibly be
that this reflects
a different way of imaging
and configuring reality,
what we call reality?
But then later in the
Neolithic, and in some places,
it doesn't happen
until the Bronze Age,
you see evidence of a shift.
And it's very interesting,
because already,
Gordon Childe, who was an early
archaeologist in the '60s,
and he idealized the
Indo-European invaders,
who brought with them
the dominator model.
But he pointed out,
now we're beginning
to see an absence
of female figures.
We're seeing also
something else.
We're beginning to
see signs of warfare.
And we're beginning to
see weapons everywhere.
And as the archaeologist,
Marija Gimbutas, points out,
you also begin to see
a very radical change
in burial practices.
Instead of primarily
communal graves,
you now begin to see
these chieftain graves,
and these are
graves where you see
the chieftain and his
skeleton, but you also
see sacrificed women
and children and horses,
because the horse was
one of the bit things
that the Indo-Europeans
brought with them
that made it possible for
them to basically take over.
And one other thing that you
see-- lots and lots of weapons,
all of these reflecting now
something very interesting,
because in the
earlier burials, you
had a few what they
call grave gifts.
Sometimes a priestess, she's
buried with an obsidian mirror.
But here, you see
all of this stuff,
and obviously what
has happened is
it reflects a different belief
system, no longer a recycling
rebirth of life, but a
one-way journey here.
And this guy better
have with him
all the stuff that he's going to
need to maintain his lifestyle,
I guess, of killing and
enslaving on the other side.
And so the emphasis
really begins
to shift towards a whole
new way of seeing reality,
and one of the other things
that we see, of course,
is a real cultural regression.
A lot of the sophisticated,
really beautiful pottery
of the earlier time
begins to disappear.
Now one of the most interesting
things about these two ways
that we're beginning
to look at of imaging
and configuring reality has to
do with basic issues, issues
of pain and of pleasure.
I don't have to tell you that if
you have a system that depends
on pain to maintain
itself, whether it's
emotional pain-- we're all most
of us familiar with that one
from dominator
child-rearing, aren't we?
A lot of the hurts
we carry, our parents
didn't invent that stuff.
It's stuff that we've inherited
from earlier times, earlier
times when people
really were educated
to absolutely obey
orders in societies where
if you didn't obey
the absolute monarch,
it was off with your head.
And families reflected
this, but I'm
going to really stay
with you in prehistory,
but I also want to show
you how this really all
relates in terms of these two
social systems to what we're
really trying to move
toward today, not
only in spirituality, but
in our lives, and our world,
for ourselves, for our children,
and for our grandchildren.
But one of the most
interesting things
that you see in
this earlier part
is, as I said, instead of an
emphasis being on the capacity
to take life-- I mean,
consider, Jehovah,
he's got a thunderbolt, right?
Zeus actually has both a
thunderbolt and a sword,
so if you didn't get
it the first time,
you've got it the second time.
The highest power is the
power to dominate and destroy.
Very graphic lessons here.
What you'll see in
these earlier societies
is a very different
representation of deity.
You don't see either female
or male deities with weapons.
Quite the contrary and this
was something that when
I was working on my
book, "Sacred Pleasure,"
I was just so struck by it,
by the absence of these kinds
of images in our art.
You see as part of the sacred
art, images of birth-giving
as part of the sacred.
In Catalhoyuk, for
example-- and Catalhoyuk
is one of the largest
Neolithic sites ever found,
ever excavated-- there's
a goddess figurine,
and she's sitting on a
throne-- a chair, a throne--
flanked by two feline animals.
And it's interesting.
You remember the cat, and it
became the symbol of the witch?
But here it was
still a good thing,
the cat, the feline animal.
And she's sitting,
because it's easier
to push when you're giving
birth when you're sitting,
and she's giving birth.
It's really not only
birth-giving, but sex.
Sex is part of the
sacred imagery.
So you're beginning
to make a connection,
because so much in the
so-called new age spirituality
is, again, about
resacrilizing sexuality.
But it had nothing really
to do with spirituality per
se, but a lot with the
movement toward a partnership
way of living, because if
that hadn't been happening,
we wouldn't be able to even
image this kind of an idea.
And yet it has such
very ancient roots.
For example, in
Catalhoyuk, you find
a plaque of a woman and a
man-- a goddess and a god--
embracing, and right next to it,
you see the woman with a child.
So it's a holy family, but
it's a natural holy family.
It's a woman and man,
and then a holy child.
There are other representations
like the so-called [INAUDIBLE]
lovers.
Again, very clearly, a
very clear phallic imagery,
very clear vulva-- I mean
these are sexual images
that we're seeing.
So it's really fascinating,
but it isn't just
spirituality and sexuality.
And I want to really
broaden this a little.
It's power.
Power is imaged differently.
You don't find in
these societies
the kinds of images that we
see in later antiquity of these
either deities or
kings or whatever
sitting on these elevated
thrones with people
sort of groveling under them.
And very often,
the people are even
represented as
being smaller, just
in case, again, you didn't get
it, that you are not important.
Only this being that
controls you is important.
And if we really go very
quickly now to a Bronze Age
civilization, the Minoan
civilization, that
lasted on the island of Crete
until about 3,500 years ago,
we see something
very interesting
to illustrate this point.
We see the so-called
Procession Fresco.
And here you have the figure in
the center of this procession
is a goddess but high
priestess figure,
hands raised in the benediction.
I call it the chalice position,
because if you hold your hands
like this, and you
breathe, sometimes
you really get a lot of energy.
And maybe we can try it at
some point, but not right now,
because I want to stay
on our journey with you.
So fine.
She's the same level
as a group of priests
who are bringing to her gifts
of the earth-- fruit and wine.
Very different representation
of power than the one
that we're used to.
And the interesting thing, one
of the most fascinating things
about all of this
is actually, even
if you don't look
at the archaeology,
we have long had clues
about these earlier times
in most of the world's
oldest legends.
Think about it for a moment.
In the Tao De Ching,
we read about--
and the clues are
very specific, very
specific clues--
we read of a time
when the Yin, or
feminine principle,
was not yet considered
subservient to the Yang,
or male principle.
We're told specifically it was
a more peaceful and just time,
and we're also told
very specifically
that it was a time when
the wisdom of the mother
was still honored.
So what does that tell you
about social organization?
Very interesting.
And by the way,
I should tell you
that the evidence that's
beginning to come to the fore
is not only, because I
focused my work on the West,
because that's the area that
I know, but, for example,
us scholars at the Chinese
Academy of Social Sciences
tested my cultural
transformation theory in China.
And they found the same pattern
of an earlier direction,
more in the
partnership direction,
towards pleasure
rather than pain.
It makes sense, and the shift,
and they wrote a book actually
that came out in 1995 in
time for the Beijing Women's
Conference called "The
Chalice and the Blade
in Chinese Culture,"
which you can
get if you're interested through
the Center for Partnership
Studies.
But anyway, let's get
back to the legends.
Hesiod, a Greek poet who wrote
about the same time as Homer--
he writes of a golden race.
Things got very idealized,
because what came later
was so brutal.
But he writes of a golden race
who lived in peaceful ease
before a lesser race came in
and brought with them Ares,
and, of course, Ares is
the Greek god of war.
And think of the best known
story in Western civilization,
the story of Adam and Eve
and the fall from Paradise.
I mean, what does
it really tell you?
Doesn't it tell
you that there was
a time when woman and man lived
in harmony with one another
and with nature?
And then there came a shift.
Now very interestingly,
why did this shift come,
and, of course, it's
the woman's fault. Oh,
and it's also the snake's fault.
Many of the Minoan
goddess figures,
for example-- a very
interesting thing,
and I forgot to tell you,
because it's so fascinating.
You see many priestess
figures with snakes
intertwined on their
arms, basically
in an oracular trance.
In other words, gnosis, the
direct access to the divine.
And if you actually think
of the Oracle of Delphi,
even in later Greek times, which
were already dominator times,
still, that was a place where
a priestess, a pythoness,
worked with a snake to give
people of the day oracular
wisdom.
So in the story of
the Garden, the snake
is still somebody that
Eve asks for wisdom,
for advice, because
that's an old tradition.
But now, of course,
she presumably
gets terrible advice,
and what's the advice?
Seek knowledge directly.
Well, that's the worst crime in
a dominator system, isn't it?
Couldn't be worse, and
it's all woman's fault,
of course, because how else
are you going to justify this,
Henceforth woman will
be subservient to man?
When I was a little
girl-- it's a long story.
I grew up in Cuba, and it
was a Catholic country,
and I went to this
mess Methodist school.
And every day we
had to go to chapel,
and they would always ask
who believes in Jesus Christ.
And I got tired of
being the only kid who
didn't raise her hand.
So I would raise my hand.
My parents found out,
and they hired this rabbi
to teach me that I'm Jewish.
And this man had a
terrible time with me,
because I would ask questions.
Well, what was it like
before the Henceforth?
And he was not happy
with me, I can tell you.
What we're beginning to find
out today is, of course--
and I've just very briefly,
briefly shared this with you--
is that before the Henceforth--
and the Henceforth, by the way,
happened a long time before
the Judeo-Christian religions.
I want to be very
clear about that.
This is not something
invented by the Hebrews
or by the Christians.
This happened in our
prehistory, this shift.
And we already see it
in Greece, for example.
My goodness.
But I don't want to go
there, because I really
want to stay with you,
because some of the clues
are so fascinating.
It's not just legends.
Actually, the traces
of a spirituality
that has erotic
elements is right there
in the Bible in
the Song of Songs.
What's it about?
It's not about God.
It's not even about
Solomon, because they
call it the Song of Solomon.
He's not even there.
It's about the
beautiful Shulamite,
and she sings to her lover
about how he will lie
all night betwixt her breasts.
It's obviously a remnant of
a tradition of spirituality
that is erotic.
And, in fact, once we no
longer look at, quote,
"reality" through these
dominator blinkers
that we've all been issued
in school, in university,
but broaden our
lens of inquiry, you
see that the very first writings
in Western civilization,
the Hymns of Inanna, cuneiform
tablets, the very first known
deciphered writings in
Western civilization.
In the Hymns of Inanna, Inanna
was the Sumerian goddess
of love and procreation.
We read of her sacred marriage
with the king god, Dumuzi,
and another erotic song.
And again, we see
the cyclical part.
They also go into the underworld
to, again, return from death.
So it's sex, birth, death,
and rebirth-- the same cycle.
There's really
much more to tell,
and you can read
about it in my books,
but let's get to
present time here,
because if you now have this
background, this picture,
you can see that a lot
of what's happening today
is, of course, a reconnection
with partnership where it's not
to go back, but to
go forward, which
is what we need to do using
the technology that we have,
but using it guided by
an ethos of partnership,
rather than domination.
For example, consider
the reappearance
of images of the
deity in female form.
There you have it.
I mean, every
connection, isn't it,
with this earlier
spirituality and reality.
The struggle of women to
enter the priesthood-- part
of the same reconnection
with earlier roots.
Consider if men were
barred from the priesthood.
They would be deprived of
moral authority, the authority
to say what is right
and what is wrong,
including what is done to them.
So it is very,
very, very important
for women to reclaim
that authority
and for men to
help women do this,
because we're in this together.
This is not a question of
women against men or men
against women.
It's a question of, do
we live in partnership,
or do we live in
a dominator way?
Because consider one of
the first mental maps
we get about what's
normal, what's
reality in human relations,
is whether the two
halves of humanity, which
is what women and men are,
relate more in partnership,
or whether one is supposed
to be in control,
and the other one
is supposed to serve
and to be dominated.
You can generalize that mental
map to a different race,
to a different religion,
to a different human,
so you have a system where
difference, beginning
with the most fundamental
difference in our species
between female and male, is
equated either with inferiority
or superiority, with being
dominated or dominating,
or with human rights, with
respect for each other,
with mutually beneficial and
caring, and truly loving,
and yes, truly
spiritual relations.
And if you look at the
struggle today in religion
and spirituality, the struggle
between so-called religious
fundamentalism, and I
have to say "so-called,"
because it is really
dominator fundamentalism.
It is not-- I mean, religion,
look at what Isaiah preached.
Look at what Jesus preached--
caring, nonviolence, empathy.
These are not the
teachings that are
being taught by the
fundamentalist leaders who
are capitalizing on
fear, on fear of change,
and, of course, on scapegoating,
because in the dominator model,
you can't go and express
your pain and your anger
and you're upset against those
who are causing you pain.
You do it against those
that you consider weak,
that you perceive as weak,
or, quote, "feminine,"
which in the dominator
mind is the same thing.
So if you start looking
at, quote, "reality,"
and forget about capitalism
and religious and secular
and east and west,
because you see
the same problem in the east.
Being a refugee to the east,
in terms of spirituality,
is not a good plan.
I mean, fascinating
traditions there,
mind you, but some
horrible ones.
I mean, consider that one of
the stories in Hindu religion
is how the great god Vishnu, his
father was going to kill him.
Have you noticed
how many stories
we have about the older
dominator afraid of the younger
one coming and killing him?
So it's even tense
for those on top.
It's not a pleasant system.
But the story is that,
fortunately, he was saved.
Vishnu was saved from his
father when a little girl
baby was substituted
to be killed instead.
Yeah.
So let's not really
look for east or west.
Let's begin to sort in terms
of partnership and dominator
traditions in our religious
and spiritual heritage.
And this is really what I
want to emphasize with you.
We need to understand that
we have many partnership
elements in society
already, thank goodness.
There are many at
the core, the core
of all the world
of spiritual things
are the partnership values of
caring, nonviolence, empathy,
and yes, of a spirituality that
inform our day-to-day lives.
Because look, in
the dominator model,
the best you can get from
spirituality is escape.
So what do you do?
You just escape from
this miserable reality,
but you don't change anything,
because to try to change
anything is too dangerous.
In a partnership spirituality,
you embrace the opportunity
to transform not only
yourself, because
personal transformation,
I'll tell you,
you can keep transforming
and transforming,
but it's like going
up on a down escalator
if you are in a
dominator environment.
So we have to really look
at this interactive process.
So we need to change
not only spirituality,
and this is really my
main message to you.
We need to change, well,
just about everything,
and the good news is we don't
have to start from scratch.
Our families are beginning to
move more towards a partnership
direction.
Lots of backlash,
but you see it.
You see it in the
men who are beginning
to do the fathering like the
mothering used to be done.
You see it in the
women who are also
rejecting these rigid
straitjackets of gender roles,
and who are becoming
more assertive instead
of manipulative.
If you don't want to have
a manipulative relationship
with someone, they
can't be disempowered,
because when someone
is disempowered,
what else are they going to do?
They're going to manipulate.
It's a miserable way of living.
We're seeing the
tension everywhere.
We happen to be in a period of
massive dominator regression,
if you haven't
noticed, the widening
of the gap between
haves and have-nots,
the recent realization of
economic control, of media
control.
But at the same time, we're see
this very powerful partnership
movement on the
grassroots level,
and I'd like to
suggest to you, this
is not a time to
give up and escape
into an otherworldly
spirituality.
It's a time for
spiritual courage,
to change the institutions,
not just ourselves.
And yes, to change the beliefs,
the myths, and the stories.
So one of the things we've
got to change is education.
My last book--
and unfortunately,
they don't have any here-- is
called "Tomorrow's Children."
And it's a book in which
I proposed a blueprint
for partnership education
in the 21st century.
And I didn't forget about
that side trip I promised you
into the biology of love.
I'm going to go there very
briefly right now, because see,
let's look at how we teach
evolution, for example,
because part of
partnership education
is providing for young people
a more accurate, more complete,
and yes, more hopeful picture
of what being human can mean.
So kids will still learn
about natural selection,
random variation,
but they would also
learn about the new
scholarship that
emphasizes cooperation, not
just competition in evolution.
They would learn about
the new scholarship that
emphasizes, yes,
mother-child bonds as one
of the most important
aspects in evolution,
in the evolution of love.
They would learn-- and
the absence of women
is fascinating,
because you can see
that by having an absence
of women in these stories,
you also have an absence of the
caring, care-giving, nurturing,
and sometimes if I look
at some of these dioramas,
it's like we weren't there.
Maybe we weren't there.
Maybe men just did
parthenogensis or something.
Well, we've got to change that.
It has to be gender
balanced, not only for girls,
but for boys.
But consider that young people
through partnership education
would learn something
that we are today
learning from neuroscience,
that by the grace of evolution,
we humans receive biochemical
rewards of enormous pleasure.
You've all experienced it.
Not only when we are
loved and cared for,
but when we love and
care for another,
whether it's a child, a
lover, a friend, even a pet.
That's part of our biology.
That's part of our evolution.
So the biology of love is
a very-- in other words,
we need to put
back into education
the missing pieces,
not only in biology,
but in our cultural revolution.
Not just in biological evolution
so that's a more balanced view,
but also in cultural evolution.
And that's really what a lot
of my work has been about.
So what can you do?
Well, you can do a lot.
I mean, you can participate
in every one of these things,
can't you?
You can introduce partnership
education in your schools.
You can begin to work on
really working together
to transform the
social institutions,
not only focusing on yourself.
And yes, one of the
things that you can
do, and I really want to
end on that, and it's hard.
You can really begin to look
at your own religious and
spiritual traditions, and
begin to sort the partnership
elements, the core elements,
those wonderful teachings
from this dominator overlay,
this encrustment that happened
during history that
was superimposed
on these true
spiritual teachings.
Now that's very hard
to do, very hard.
It's one of the
hardest things to do.
We learned these stories, these
beliefs, this, quote, "reality"
very early, and it's also loaded
with so much fear, isn't it?
I mean, we think,
my gosh, if we're
going to challenge some of
this, something terrible
will happen to us.
We're not just going
to burn in hell
for all eternity, which
is a long time when
you think about it.
But it makes us scared.
But if we understand that
all of these teachings
were part of a system,
a system that we've
been trying to struggle
to leave behind,
then we begin to see
something very interesting.
We begin to see that
we can, you and I
can begin to sort out
what we want to keep.
We don't want to
throw out everything.
We want to strengthen those
elements that will really
serve us, and we
want to start leaving
behind those that will not.
Now I want to even
suggest to you--
and I will close on
this-- that not only love,
but actually spirituality is
rooted in human evolution.
Not just human
evolution, in evolution.
Consider this yearning
for connection
for oneness, which is really
at the core of so much
of the spiritual experience.
Well, that's how the first
multi-celled organisms
formed, didn't they?
By connecting.
But when you get
to the human level,
when you get to the level
of consciousness now,
something happens, something
very, very interesting happens.
You begin to see
that we are really
integrally interconnected,
not only with one another,
but with all that is so
incredible in this universe
into which we have been born.
And we begin to see that the
mystery of the universe, we
are part of this, and that
our yearning for oneness,
for caring connection
is really the impetus
behind spirituality.
And you begin to see that
if we understand literally
our interconnection, that
we cannot continue in this
dominator way, because
it's dangerous.
It's dangerous not only to us,
but to all life on this planet.
So I feel very
passionately about this,
not only as a scholar
and educator, but as
a mother and
grandmother, that we
have to have the
spiritual courage-- yes,
the spiritual courage--
to also challenge
traditions of domination in
our own spiritual and religious
traditions, as well as
in all other traditions,
and consider that when we do,
we will be able to break free.
We will be able to break free
from the fetters of this system
that has literally suppressed
our inherent spirituality,
our inherent
capacity for oneness
with that which we
call the divine,
and that if we have
this spiritual courage,
we can open up a new area
in evolution, an era where
spirituality can inform our
lives right here on Earth,
an era that can help us
bring back not only the joy
and pleasure to spirituality,
but to all aspects
of our lives.
I thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
Thank you.
Thank you so much.